> “I suspect that when the history of the 21st century is written circa 2100, he [Girard] will be seen as one of the great intellectuals” - Peter Thiel

When Blake Masters was posting his notes on [Peter Thiel's lectures at Stanford](http://blakemasters.tumblr.com/peter-thiels-cs183-startup), I found myself fascinated by the influence of [Rene Girard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rene_Girard).

Girard's an original thinker. I'm not fully persuaded by his worldview: it explains a lot, but not everything. I've summarized his views here.

1\. <b>Mimesis determines what you want</b>: In Girard's view, people have <i>appetites</i>, which are your basic evolutionary needs: e.g. hunger; and <i>desires</i>, which are all other wants, e.g. the desire for a diamond ring. <b>Girard's belief is that people form desires based on what others around them want</b>. 

This is known as the 'mimetic mechanism'. People take their cues from the people around them. They use other people as 'models', and (subconsciously) want what other people want, while rationalizing the whole time. In the diamond ring example, companies like [DeBeers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Beers) create a want artificially, and it catches on like a virus. People want diamond rings because other people want them, but they rationalise it by saying "<i>it shows that my partner loves me</i>".

How has this influenced Thiel? In [this video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=esk7W9Jowtc), Thiel notes that people can be "disturbingly herdlike". Both this assertion, & Thiel's general contrarianism, chime with Girard's philosophy. More generally:

* <b>Stock market</b>: The average agent is <b>not</b> a rational utility-maximizer who coldly assess the fundamentals before making investments. Rather, the stock market is fundamentally herd driven. Therefore, there are opportunities to be exploited: people form blind spots because they are collectively taking their cues from each other. One example here is Thiel [calling the $8 billion housing bubble](http://bigthink.com/ideas/17721) before most other people, making his fund a lot of money as a result. 
* <b>Education</b>: Most people still believe that getting an education guarantees safety. Thiel believes that the decision to invest so much in higher education is irrational. If education is overvalued, there are opportunities to be exploited. Hence the ['20 under 20'](http://www.thielfellowship.org/) scheme. 
* <b>Business/technology</b>: Thiel tends to look for startups doing fundamentally new or different things, rather than copying existing ideas. The Girardian view implies that people will over-crowd certain areas (e.g. social web applications) and under-crowd other areas (e.g. life-extension tech). Thiel seems to agree (from [Founder's Fund](http://www.foundersfund.com/)): "VC has ceased to be the funder of the future, and instead has become a funder of features, widgets, irrelevances."

2\. <b>Mimesis as the cause of conflict</b>: Girard's view is that conflict caused by the mimetic mechanism: people fight because they model their desires on each other, come to desire similar things, and end up fighting over them. Because of this imitiative process, they tend to become more and more alike. Think of Microsoft/Apple/Google all trying to make the best smartphone/tablet.

> “Violence is generated by this process; or rather, violence is the process itself when two or more partners try to prevent one another from appropriating the object they all desire through physical or other means” (Girard).

Thiel clearly subscribes to this view. From Blake Masters's transcripts of his lectures:

> So which perspective is right in the tech world? How much is Marx? How much is Shakespeare?

> In the great majority of cases, it’s straight Shakespeare. They grind each other down through increased competition. And everyone loses sight of the bigger picture.

(Source: [Blake Masters](http://blakemasters.tumblr.com/post/23250566538/peter-thiels-cs183-startup-class-12-notes-essay))

* <b>Business / tech</b>:, Thiel believes that a myopic focus on your competitors can be dangerous if it compromises your own vision. In the lecture quoted above, he uses Google/Microsoft as 	an example, noting how e.g. Microsoft's decision to go after Google in search has cost them billions of dollars. The counterargument here (made by Reid Hoffman in the lecture) is that Microsoft is rationally going after a lucrative part of the internet. Thiel, however, disagrees: 

> "It isn’t just rational calculation because tremendous effort is spent on things that, probabilistically, aren’t lucrative at all."

* <b>Hiring/business</b>: Probably the source of Thiel's 'extreme focus' philosophy (source: [Quora](http://www.quora.com/PayPal/What-strong-beliefs-on-culture-for-entrepreneurialism-did-Peter-Max-David-have-at-PayPal/answer/Keith-Rabois)). This is the idea that each person, in an organization, is given one thing to focus on and therefore one contribution that they will primarily be judged by. The rationale makes sense from a Girardian point of view: if you give people more than one thing, the probability of overlap increases; increase the overlap, and you end up with people wanting the same thing and therefore conflict, something Thiel takes pains to avoid within a company. ("Most companies are killed by internal infighting, even though it may not seem like it.")

3\. <b>The scapegoat mechanism</b>: Girard's theory of social change: societies gradually become more and more conflicted as mimesis spreads like a virus & people start fighting over the same things. A crisis point is reached. This crisis is resolved by the scapegoat mechanism: people decide that one person (or group of people) is responsible for the social discord and persecute / kill that person. The cycle then repeats. 

Thiel subscribes to this view, as is evident from [his lecture on the founder as god](http://blakemasters.tumblr.com/post/24578683805/peter-thiels-cs183-startup-class-18-notes-essay). You can see, from the lecture, that it affects his views on the justice system (where the jury isn't rational, you often get perverse outcomes because of the scapegoat mechanism), society (celebrities rise, are crowned as kings, & then people turn on them), politics (right wing / left wing polarization, resulting in each side having their own scapegoats; the Occupy movement scapegoating the rich). 

4\. <b>Religion</b>: Girard is a Christian. One of his arguments in this area is that Christianity is a unique religion that represents a turning point in human history. 

Why? Throughout most of human history, society has been sacrificing essentially random people (scapegoats) to restore social order. <i>Christanity is the first religion to call humans out on this monstrous behaviour</i>, by showing us very clearly that the person being scapegoated is totally innocent - by definition, since he's the son of God. 

The scapegoat mechanism stops working if everyone knows about it. In the absence of the ability to resort to the scapegoat mechanism, society could potentially get more and more conflictual, without having a clear way of resolving conflicts. (This view probably contradicts [the empirical evidence](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424053111904106704576583203589408180.html).)

Thiel is, from what I have read, Christian as well. No public statements go into detail on his religious belief, so I can't make claims about it: however, it's probable that Girard's view of Christianity was a key influence. He certainly believes that increasing conflict ('bad mimesis') is a possible and not unlikely outcome.